ENH add force_finite to control the behaviour of constant target in explained variance and R2 (#17266)
scikit-learn/scikit-learn: doc/modules/model_evaluation.rst

The best possible score is 1.0, lower values are worse.

Note: when the prediction residuals have zero mean (perfectly unbiased
model), the Explained Variance score and the :ref:`r2_score` are identical.

In the particular case when the true y is constant, the Explained Variance
score is not finite: it is either ``NaN`` (perfect predictions) or ``-Inf``
(imperfect predictions). Such non-finite scores may prevent correct model
optimization such as grid-search cross-validation to be performed correctly.
For this reason the default behaviour of :func:`explained_variance_score` is
to replace them with 1.0 (perfect predictions) or 0.0 (imperfect predictions).
You can set the ``fix_when_y_true_is_constant`` parameter to ``False`` to
prevent this fix to happen and fallback on the original Explained Variance

> score.

Reviewer: Would ``consider_constant_y_true`` be better for this parameter name?

    array([0.967..., 1.        ])
    >>> explained_variance_score(y_true, y_pred, multioutput=[0.3, 0.7])
    0.990...
    >>> y_true = [-2, -2, -2]
    >>> y_pred = [-2, -2, -2]
    >>> explained_variance_score(y_true, y_pred)
    1.0
    >>> explained_variance_score(y_true, y_pred, fix_when_y_true_is_constant=False)
    nan
    >>> y_true = [-2, -2, -2]
    >>> y_pred = [-2, -2, -2 + 1e-8]
    >>> explained_variance_score(y_true, y_pred)
    0.0
    >>> explained_variance_score(y_true, y_pred, fix_when_y_true_is_constant=False)

>     -inf

Reviewer: Thank you, this is a simple and useful example.

The best possible score is 1.0, lower values are worse.

Note: when the prediction residuals have zero mean (perfectly unbiased
model), the Explained Variance score and the :ref:`r2_score` are identical.

> In the particular case where the true y is constant, the Explained Variance

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the particular case where the true target is constant, the Explained Variance
```

The best possible score is 1.0, lower values are worse.

Note: when the prediction residuals have zero mean (perfectly unbiased
model), the Explained Variance score and the :ref:`r2_score` are identical.

In the particular case where the true target is constant, the Explained
Variance score is not finite: it is either ``NaN`` (perfect predictions) or

> ``-Inf`` (imperfect predictions). Such non-finite scores may prevent correct

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``-Inf`` (worst predictions). Such non-finite scores may prevent correct
```

Author: I disagree on this: even quasi-perfect predictions will lead to -Inf when y_true is constant.

Reviewer 3: You are right. I misread.

model optimization such as grid-search cross-validation to be performed
correctly. For this reason the default behaviour of
:func:`explained_variance_score` is to replace them with 1.0 (perfect

> predictions) or 0.0 (imperfect predictions). You can set the ``force_finite``

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
predictions) or 0.0 (worst predictions). You can set the ``force_finite``
```

Author: See other comment above: this is incorrect, all non-perfect predictions will lead to -Inf

Reviewer 3: I agree.

Note that :func:`r2_score` calculates unadjusted R² without correcting for
bias in sample variance of y.

> In the particular case when the true y is constant, the R^2 score is not
> finite: it is either ``NaN`` (perfect predictions) or ``-Inf`` (imperfect
> predictions). Such non-finite scores may prevent correct model optimization

Reviewer: To use the current formatting.
```suggestion
In the particular case when the true y is constant, the R² score is not
finite: it is either ``NaN`` (perfect predictions) or ``-Inf`` (imperfect
predictions). Such non-finite scores may prevent correct model optimization
```

such as grid-search cross-validation to be performed correctly. For this reason
the default behaviour of :func:`r2_score` is to replace them with 1.0 (perfect

> predictions) or 0.0 (imperfect predictions). You can set the
> ``fix_when_y_true_is_constant`` parameter to ``False`` to prevent this fix to
> happen and fallback on the original R².

Reviewer: Not taking the parameter renaming suggested above into account, can this be simplified?
```suggestion
predictions) or 0.0 (imperfect predictions). If ``fix_when_y_true_is_constant``
is set to ``False``, this score fallbacks on the original R² definition.
```

As such variance is dataset dependent, R² may not be meaningfully comparable
across different datasets. Best possible score is 1.0 and it can be negative
(because the model can be arbitrarily worse). A constant model that always
predicts the expected (average) value of y, disregarding the input features,

> would get a :math:`R^2` score of 0.0.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
would get an :math:`R^2` score of 0.0.
```

> Note: when the prediction residuals have zero mean (perfectly unbiased
> model), the :math:`R^2` score and the :ref:`explained_variance_score` are identical.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note: when the prediction residuals have zero mean (an unconditionally calibrated/unbiased
model), the :math:`R^2` score and the :ref:`explained_variance_score` are identical.
```

Author: Although I trust that this is accurate for some statistics community, I am not very fond of this wording as it makes it much harder to understand for a "standard" user (e.g. Machine Learning community or broad data scientist).

Reviewer 3: The point is that a model with zero mean residual is by far not "perfectly unbiased". For instance, the mean residual grouped by some (categorical) feature could be very unbiased.

Author: Fair point. What about simply "(unbiased model)" or even removing the parenthesis ? That would be simpler to read

Reviewer 3: @glemaitre What do you think?

I would be either correct (my suggestion) or remove the parenthesis.

Reviewer 2: removing parenthesis is good

Note that :func:`r2_score` calculates unadjusted R² without correcting for
bias in sample variance of y.

> In the particular case where the true y is constant, the :math:`R^2` score is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the particular case where the true target is constant, the :math:`R^2` score is
```

Note that :func:`r2_score` calculates unadjusted R² without correcting for
bias in sample variance of y.

In the particular case where the true target is constant, the :math:`R^2` score is

> not finite: it is either ``NaN`` (perfect predictions) or ``-Inf`` (imperfect
> predictions). Such non-finite scores may prevent correct model optimization

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
not finite: it is either ``NaN`` (perfect predictions) or ``-Inf`` (worst
predictions). Such non-finite scores may prevent correct model optimization
```

Author: same as above

such as grid-search cross-validation to be performed correctly. For this reason
the default behaviour of :func:`r2_score` is to replace them with 1.0 (perfect

> predictions) or 0.0 (imperfect predictions). If ``force_finite``

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
predictions) or 0.0 (worst predictions). If ``force_finite``
```

Author: same as above

> is set to ``False``, this score fallbacks on the original :math:`R^2` definition.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
is set to ``False``, this score falls back on the original :math:`R^2` definition.
```
